AI RESUME ANALYZER - PROJECT EXPLANATION
========================================

1. PROJECT PURPOSE
------------------
This website accepts a resume and gives a score from 1 to 10. It identifies
strong areas, missing areas, and shows a feature graph. If the score is below
6, it also displays a clearer resume draft based on the uploaded text.

The program supports TXT, PDF, and image resumes. Image reading needs OCR.


2. HOW IT WORKS
---------------
1. The user uploads a resume in the browser.
2. app.py checks the file type and saves it temporarily.
3. resume_analyzer.py extracts the text from the file.
4. The analyzer turns the text into 20 numeric features.
5. A small neural network combines the feature values and returns a score.
6. The web page displays the score, feedback, and graph.
7. When the score is lower than 6, resume_improver.py creates a safe,
   reorganized draft from the supplied content.


3. FILES AND THEIR RESPONSIBILITIES
-----------------------------------
app.py
  The Flask web application. It receives uploads, calls the analyzer, and
  displays the result. It calls the improver only for scores below 6.

resume_analyzer.py
  The scoring module. It reads files, extracts features, contains and trains
  the neural network, and returns scores and feedback.

resume_improver.py
  The separate low-score improvement module. It cleans supplied text, detects
  headings such as Skills, Experience, and Education, and organizes it into a
  draft. It never creates fake jobs, dates, skills, or achievements.

templates/index.html
  The structure of the browser page: upload form, score, feedback, graph, and
  improved-resume draft.

static/styles.css
  The visual design, including layout, score ring, graph bars, and the draft.

requirements.txt
  The Python packages needed to run the project.


4. LIBRARIES USED
-----------------
Flask: creates the website and handles requests.
Werkzeug: safely handles upload filenames through secure_filename.
pypdf: extracts text from PDF files.
Pillow (PIL): opens image files for OCR.
pytesseract: connects Python to Tesseract OCR for image text extraction.
re: Python regular expressions; finds keywords, emails, numbers, and headings.
math: provides the exponential calculation needed by sigmoid.
random: initializes model weights and creates sample training data.
pathlib and tempfile: safely work with temporary files and paths.

For image OCR, the Tesseract application must also be installed on the system.


5. THE 20 CHECKED RESUME FEATURES
----------------------------------
Each check becomes a number between 0 and 1. Higher is better.

1. Resume length: enough words and useful content.
2. Role-relevant skills: terms such as Python, SQL, Excel, AWS, communication.
3. Action verbs: terms such as built, developed, managed, led, and improved.
4. Education/training: degree, university, certification, diploma, and similar.
5. Important sections: Skills, Experience, Education, Projects, Summary, etc.
6. Contact details: email, phone number, LinkedIn, or GitHub.
7. Measurable results: numbers and percentages, such as "Improved sales 20%."
8. Bullet structure: bullets make a resume easier to scan.
9. Readable lines: very long lines reduce readability.
10. Vocabulary range: variety of words used in the resume.
11. Target role clarity: checks for a clear role such as engineer or analyst.
12. Professional summary: checks for a Summary, Profile, or Objective section.
13. Project evidence: checks for projects or portfolio work.
14. Experience evidence: checks for work, internship, or volunteer experience.
15. Portfolio links: checks for LinkedIn, GitHub, Kaggle, GitLab, or portfolio.
16. Certifications: checks for certification-related content.
17. Date clarity: checks for dates in education and experience timelines.
18. Skills organization: checks for a clearly grouped skills section.
19. Achievement bullets: checks for action bullets with a result or number.
20. Completion check: detects visible placeholders such as [Add your email].

Every graph label has a hover and keyboard-focus explanation describing exactly
what that feature checks.


6. WHAT IS THE NEURAL NETWORK?
-------------------------------
A neural network is a mathematical program inspired by neurons in the brain.
Here, it learns how to combine the 20 resume feature values into one quality
score.

Network structure:

Resume text
  -> 20 extracted feature values
  -> hidden layer with 12 neurons
  -> one output value
  -> score from 1 to 10

Connections between neurons have values called weights. A larger weight means
that input has more effect on the next neuron. The network changes its weights
while training so its predictions become closer to the example target scores.


7. HOW THE NETWORK TRAINS
-------------------------
make_training_data() creates sample feature sets. The target is mainly based
on a weighted resume-quality rule, plus examples of weak, average, and strong
resumes. The network trains for 700 epochs (passes over the training samples).

For every example it does this:
1. Predicts a result from the feature values.
2. Compares the prediction with the target score.
3. Calculates the error.
4. Adjusts weights and biases a little to reduce later error.

This correction process is a basic form of backpropagation.

Important: this is a lightweight educational model. It uses synthetic training
data, not a large dataset of real recruiter decisions. The score is useful
feedback, not a hiring decision or guarantee.


8. WHAT IS A SIGMOID FUNCTION?
------------------------------
The sigmoid function is used inside every neuron in this network.

Formula:
sigmoid(x) = 1 / (1 + e^(-x))

In simple language, it changes any input number into a smooth number between
0 and 1.

- A very negative input becomes close to 0.
- An input of 0 becomes 0.5.
- A very positive input becomes close to 1.

Why it is used:
1. It keeps each neuron output in a predictable 0-to-1 range.
2. It adds non-linearity, so the network can learn more than simple addition.
3. It is smooth, so weights can be adjusted while training.
4. The final value is easy to map to a score.

The code changes the final value to a 1-10 score using:
score = round(network_output * 9 + 1)


9. WHY EXTRACT FEATURES FIRST?
------------------------------
Computers need numbers to work with. Feature extraction converts resume text
into numbers that a neural network can use. For example:

- An email address increases the contact-details feature.
- "Developed" or "led" increases the action-verbs feature.
- "25%" increases the measurable-results feature.

The neural network considers all values together to calculate one score.


10. HOW THE IMPROVED RESUME DRAFT WORKS
----------------------------------------
The draft feature is template-based, not a text-generating AI system. It uses
only the resume text uploaded by the candidate. It recognizes common headings,
places details under useful sections, adds a summary prompt if needed, and adds
editing reminders. Missing information is shown in square brackets.

This is deliberate: the app must not invent work experience, skills, dates, or
results that the candidate has not provided.


11. PROJECT-MANAGER QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
------------------------------------------
Q: What problem does the project solve?
A: It gives job seekers fast, structured feedback about resume completeness,
   clarity, and measurable content. Low-score resumes get a clearer draft.

Q: Is this really AI?
A: Yes. The final score is produced by a small custom neural network. It is a
   lightweight educational model, so it should not replace recruiter judgment.

Q: Why use a neural network instead of only if/else rules?
A: Rules extract useful text features. The neural network then learns how to
   combine those values into one score, keeping the scoring layer separate and
   easier to improve later.

Q: What does the score mean?
A: It estimates how complete and readable a resume is according to this
   project's checks. It does not predict whether someone will be hired.

Q: What happens below a score of 6?
A: The app displays a reorganized, ATS-friendly draft below the feedback. It
   uses supplied text and prompts the user to complete missing information.

Q: Does the draft invent information?
A: No. It only reorganizes content from the uploaded resume and uses prompts
   for missing details.

Q: Where do I add a new scoring feature?
A: Use resume_analyzer.py. Add it in extract_features(), add its label, and
   ensure the network input size matches the total number of features.

Q: Where do I change the resume-draft format?
A: Use resume_improver.py. It is intentionally separate from app.py and the
   scoring code so the project remains organized.

Q: How are PDF and image files handled?
A: pypdf reads PDFs. Pillow and pytesseract use OCR for images. OCR accuracy
   depends on image quality and the Tesseract installation.

Q: What are the limitations?
A: Keyword checks can miss equivalent wording. Training data is synthetic, OCR
   can make errors, and the app does not yet compare a resume to a job posting.

Q: What are good next improvements?
A: Add job-description matching, role-specific skills, a downloadable draft,
   browser editing, saved history, automated tests, and real labelled training
   data.

Q: Is a resume stored permanently?
A: No. The current app uses a temporary upload file only for text extraction,
   then deletes it. There is no database in the project.


12. 30-SECOND PROJECT DESCRIPTION
----------------------------------

"This is a Flask-based AI Resume Analyzer. It extracts text from uploaded
resumes, measures twenty qualities such as skills, action verbs, contacts, and
measurable achievements, then uses a small neural network to create a score
from 1 to 10. It gives feedback and a feature graph. For low scores, a separate
module creates a clearer resume draft without inventing candidate information."
